we're taking you live back now to Aman
Jordan where the Jordanian foreign
minister is speaking he's holding a
press conference also with the United
Nation Secretary General Antonio guer
let's listen in to both of them
Palestinians now are at ICP level five
that means over 1 million Palestinians
are facing famine uh supplies have not
been allowed into major parts of GAD
including the north so basically what we
have is that Palestinians are killed by
Israeli bullets and we having
Palestinians dying from starvation from
dehydration uh this has gone on for way
too far Israel has violated every
humanitarian law every moral principle
every humanitarian value and
unfortunately the world is still unable
to say enough and say stop today the
security Council will be voting on a
resolution uh demanding uh uh ceasefire
demanding the entry of supplies we urge
all members of the security Council to
support that resolution if only to send
a message that what's happening is
unacceptable and what's happening has to
stop obviously Israel has ignored un
Security Council resolutions before
there are no indications that it will
honor this one but I think what adopting
the resolution would do today is just to
send a message that Israel cannot
continue to uh with its aggression with
impunity uh in complete disregard to
international law in complete disregard
to human values and in complete
disregard
to life um sir you said it aply uh not
too long ago Gaza has become an open
graveyard not just for children but for
international law and the consequences
for that are extremely devastating not
just to the region but to the whole uh
principles of peace and Order uh that uh
your organization stands for uh we thank
you for uh your strong voice we thank
you for for the positions that you've
taken uh demanding respect for
international law demanding respect for
the UN Charter and urging an immediate
end uh to war crimes and to the uh
killing and starving of uh of the
innocent uh and we uh will continue to
work with you sir to make sure that we
end this madness and uh we're going to
continue to work with our International
Partners to make sure that uh the world
stands United in saying enough is enough
enough killing enough war crimes enough
massacring of of uh of innocent and
enough impunity uh for violating
international law and uh
humanitarian uh law as well
uh the UN and Jordan have been solid
partners for decades not only do we work
together on uh the Palestinian issue uh
but we also work together on addressing
the needs of refugees obviously on is
here and I recogn iiz the commissioner
General who him him and his organization
have doing a tremendous job in trying to
ease the suffering of the Palestinian
people at those times uh that are again
trying our our whole Humanity so just
want to say that Ona is indispensable it
is irr it is
irreplaceable and uh we're happy to see
that many countries are coming back now
to helping Ona save lives because every
dollar that is given to Ona is saving a
human life and every dollar taken away
from AR carries the risk of having a
child suffer and die from from the lack
of food and medicine so uh we stand
together in supporting the agency and in
urging all our our partners to continue
to provide on the support that it's so
deserve so that it can again do the
basic job of just simply saving lives
also we've been working together on many
other facets of of cooperation
particularly in relation to the Syrian
refugees and uh while we great gr f for
the support the UN and the International
Community has been given to uh help us
in our effort to provide Syrian refugees
with a dignified lives and meet their
needs and make sure that they're not
victimized again they've been victims of
conflict we cannot victimize them by
having them ignored by the International
Community but I have to say that we must
Ring the Alarm and ring it loud about
the dwindling support that's coming to
refugees uh many un agencies are cutting
down their services in Jordan simply
because not enough it is coming that
means the burden will Shi uh to us and
we simply cannot carry that burden alone
so again uh we urge that our partners
continue to show the the responsibility
towards uh Syrian refugees who do
deserve uh a life of dignity and
fulfillment until conditions are
conducive for them to voluntarily go
back to their country which is the only
realistic answer to their flight so on
all those issues sir we're going to
continue to work as partners uh we have
immediate priorities right now in which
we are aligned uh in the aggression
allow sufficient humanitarian supplies
in and obviously prevent what would be
another massacre in Rafa uh the whole
world is saying going into rafah will
lead to a humanitarian Massacre uh the
Israeli government is not listening uh
they're still reaffirming that they will
go into Rafa and uh uh I would just
conclude by saying that we cannot allow
uh a group of radicals uh racist
extremist ministers uh to Doom the
future uh of of the region to more
conflict and more war and more
immediately we cannot allow them to
continue to kill with impunity thank you
sir I willcome you in Jordan and I look
forward to further engagement assalamu
alaykum dear foreign minister saf dear
friend thank you for your warm welcome
and it's good to be back in Jordan
especially at such a critical time for
the region and for the
world when I see Jordan I see solidarity
in
action and I see in the words and deeds
of his majesty King Abdullah a global
Champion for peace and I see it in the
spirit of the people of Jordan and your
enormous compassion towards those
fleeing
AO Jordan is to the largest number of
Palestine
refugees I visited the camp earlier
today and commend Jordan for your
pivotal advocacy for the vital work of
un you have also opened your hearts and
doors to many others including refugees
from Syria and I urge the International
Community to support Jordan as it
supports millions of people in needs it
is very worrying the reduction of
funding in relation to Refugee programs
in Jordan and in other parts of the
world Jordan's Spirit of solidarity is
precisely what brings me here once
again I am on my annual solidarity
Mission during the holy months of
Ramadan where I visit and fast with
Muslim communities in
distress Ramadan is meant to be a period
of Celebration but not this year
hearts are heavy in the region and
indeed around the world from the
unprecedented and ongoing Devastation in
Gaza as well as rising violence in the
occupied West
Bank I commend Jordan for your support
for
deescalation including particularly your
very important role in East
Jerusalem and I salute Jordan for your
Relentless effort to get humanitarian
assistance into Gaza including through
the personal efforts and wisdom of his
majesty for my part I will keep pushing
for the removal of all obstacles to life
saving guge for more acccess and for
more entry
points but we must face
facts there will be no sustainable
humanitarian solution with an ongoing
War as bloody as this
let me repeat nothing justifies the abor
October 7 attacks and O taking by
amas and nothing justifies the
collective punishment of the Palestinian
people the effective delivery of
humanitarian Aid requires the immediate
delivery of a humanitarian
ceasefire the need is
urgent I was at the rough border
crossing this weekend
and I met with injured Palestinian
civilians and they're directly from our
Frontline humanitarian
colleagues they are veterans of some of
the worst humanitarian crisis in recent
decades they have seen it all and yet
without exception they told me they had
never seen anything as horrible as what
is happening in Gaza
today the scale and speed of the deaths
and destruction
are on an entirely different
level and now starvation is bearing down
on Palestinians in
Gaza there is a growing Consciousness
around the world that all of these must
stop the fighting must end now the
hostages must be released now and we
must not lose sight of the big
picture A Lasting end to the Israeli
Palestinian conflict can only come
through a toot State
solution Israelis must see their
legitimate needs for security
materialized and Palestinians must see
their legitimate aspirations for a fully
independent viable and sovereign state
realized in line with United Nations
resolutions international law and
previous
agreements we know where the alternative
would lead to indefinitely prolonging a
conflict that has become a major threat
to Global Peace and security to
exacerbating polarization to emboldening
extremists
everywhere those standing in the way of
a two-state solution have an obligation
to State clearly what is the alternative
they
want how would the future look with such
a large number of Palestinians inside
without any real sense of freedom of
rights and of
dignity this would be
unconceivable the two-state solution is
the only way to address the legitimate
aspirations of both Israelis and
Palestinians I know it is easy to be
cynical in today's world but that's a
luxury we cannot
afford cynicism is a form of surrender
to the prevailing assumptions of the
moment it is a refuge for those too weak
too narrow too timid to imagine a better
future when things are difficult we must
try even harder and I will keep pushing
for peace inspired by your
example and once again dear foreign
minister dear friends thank you and
thank the government and people of
Jordan for leading the way to solidarity
and peace thank you sir take some
questions with respect to what is
currently taking place in the north of
Gaza
Strip the
volume it's not enough no it's the
volume that's it's
my it's
my come on I have to take this out to be
able to listening to
you yes I can hear you
now what is currently taking place in
the north of Gaza Strip totally denied
of relief Aid uh
simultaneously with
Israel's uh statement that they will uh
attack Rafa how you together with the
international
Partners working towards lessening the
of the Palestinians who are teetering on
the verge of
[Music]
famine first of all in relation to the
northern part of Gaza it is absolutely
essential to have a massive supply of
humanitarian a now and this means
opening more entry points
this means uh a concentration of efforts
of all entities without obstacles
without limitations from the Israeli
side in order to be able to rescue the
people of Northern Gaza of an imminent
risk of familyin many children are
already today dying of
hunger finally in relation to the sace
to Rafa our position has been very clear
we consider that a ground offensive
against Rafa could lead to a
catastrophic humanitarian
situation Gaza is already reeling under
famine the north part of Gaza is in a
dire situation as the Israeli occupation
forces are using delivery Aid as weapon
all this can come to an end if the
Israeli blance comes to an end and
delivery of Aid can be allowed
through more border crossing famine is a
direct cause of Israeli policy of denial
of relief Aid
into Gaza Strip we are prepared to
provide all what is needed by the Gaz
and population the relief Aid is already
present the mechanism are in are in
place what is missing is to uh eliminate
is is's policy of total denial of
delivery of relief Aid into
Gaza a question to the Secretary
[Music]
General
is prevented hona from delivering relief
Aid into the north of Gaza Strip they
are also accusing honor to be uh
collaborating with the Palestinian
resistance is there a
clear position by the International
Community to respond to Israel's claims
and also to put an end to the situation
in the north the second question to the
Jordanian uh foreign minister it is
clear that Israel is simply buying time
refusing a ceasefire on the other hand
you are still calling for a
ceasefire how do your calls
resonate where
is the response to the entire Arab
diplomacy and how can we make these
calls effective and taking place in
reality decision not to
allow the decision not to allow un
convoys to go to Northern Gaza where we
have a dramatic starvation situation is
totally
unacceptable and those that took that
decision must assume the responsibility
fa ing history of the consequences of
the
decision in relation to the dramatic
situation of the people in Northern Gaza
where as I mentioned we have already
children dying of
hunger the position of Jordan is not
only to outcry calls but they we are
doing our best since day one to bring
this war to an end and our efforts have
not come to a halt let's be realistic
Jordan Alone
cannot bring this war to an end at a
time where Israel is defying the
international in entire world violating
the international law continuing with
their
pleasur however we started to see more
outcries from the International
Community the inter interal community's
position has been shifting towards
Israel uh
killing uh policy of
starvation we are dealing with reality
where Israel is defying and violating
the
international law they are even going
against their uh historical Ally the
United
States today as I iterated earlier there
is a draft resolution before the
security Council calling for a ceasefire
and Swift Delivery of relief Aid we are
urging all the member states to adopt
this draft resolution even to take a
moral and legal and ethical stand
stating that what the policy of killing
starvation is unacceptable and undermine
the International Community the
international law and the international
organization at the end of the day
Israel is doing what they are doing
perpetrating their crimes simply because
they are not deterred there is nothing
to to deter Israel we have gone beyond
that the Israeli government is led by
radical racist ministers we cannot allow
them to continue to drown the entire
region into further chaos rather than
sending arms to Israel diplomacy must
work delegations must visit Israel to
direct the current Israeli government
and the current government must be held
liable for their
crimes the crisis and the tragedy of
Gaza and gazans are
exacerbating the inter the
entire International Community is losing
credibility for the Dual standards and
Israel's continued violations of the
International System God not that since
day one Jordan has been doing all they
can the Palestinian c will remain our
focal issue the Palestinian people the
safeguarding of their rights their
interest and their right to life uh will
be our Paramount priority we including
the International Community are faced
with Israeli government the most radical
in its history turning a blind eye not
only to the international law but all
the human and ethical values continuing
to kill starve Gaza and gazin and we are
doing all what we can with our regional
and international Partners including the
United Nations and all those willing to
take a clear stand against the Israeli
occupation for the uh sake of humanity
dignity and the right of the Palestinian
people and even
further uh the position of Jordan has
been clear doing all what we can to
bring this conflict to an end and the
only means is by ending the occupation
and enabling the Palestinian to have
their independent sovereign state
established on the 1967 borders with
East Jerusalem at its capital let this
war come to an end and even if it ends
more Wars would be waged simply because
this position this situation cannot
continue where the horizons of Hope
Freedom before five Palestinian and more
are
undermined Maria will the Jordan times
after more than five months brutal
violence and Collective punishments uh
that inflicted uh upon Palestinians by
Israeli occupation forces today the
Security Council is held hostage by a
couple of members who stand behind uh
empty arguments at the expense of
Palestinian lives thereby the council
failing to assume its responsibilities
and maintain International Peace and
security the question is how will the UN
remedy the diminished credibility of its
own promises and what are the new
challenges to uh to to conflict
resolution that is uh that this war
presented finally uh what are the
mechanisms to pressure Israel at this
point to allow full AIDS into Gaza
taking into consideration that denying
AIDS contradicts icj's ruling which
ordered immediate measures to protect
Palestinians in Gaza from the risk of
genocide by ensuring sufficient
humanitarian assistance thank
you I think it's necessary to recognize
that the United Nations is a complex
organization in the United Nations you
have humanitarian agencies that are
today working in Gaza with an extreme
courage we have already
171 workers staff members of HRA that
were killed in Gaza and they are United
Nations so we have in the United Nations
extraordinary examples of courage and
generosity and solidarity with people
suffering the United Nations is also the
general assembly that has assumed clear
positions in relation to this
conflict United
Nations
is the Secretary
General that has been assuming on behalf
of the Secretariat clear positions in
relation to this conflict and the secret
and the United Nations is also the
security Council and indeed the security
Council today is victim of the enormous
geopolitical divides in the world with
the superpowers at Thoughts with each
other and creating a situation in which
it's very difficult to find consensus in
relation to any of the difficult crisis
we are facing in the world not only in
relation to Gaza and that is why it is
so important that finally the security
Council became
able to approve a resolution asking for
a ceasefire in
Gaza but uh at the same time it is our
duty to do everything to mobilize the
whole of the International
Community and I see a consensus emerging
in the International Community even in
countries that are friends and allies of
Israel I see a consensus emerging that
this war must stop I see a consensus
emerging that any ground offensive
against Rafa would lead to a
catastrophic humanitarian situation I
see a consensus emerging in the
International Community to tell Israel
that fully recognizing the Grievances
caused by the horrific attacks of amas
uh in the 7th of October fully
recognizing the drama of the hostages
that need to be immediately and then
conditionally released fully recognizing
those aspects nothing can justify this
Collective punishment of the Palestinian
people that is causing such an immense
tragedy in Gaza
sir thank you very
[Applause]
much you've just been listening to a
joint press conference by the Jordanian
foreign minister Iman Safar and the
Secretary General of the United Nations
Antonio Gutierrez a few of the headlines
uh from that conference and both the
minister and the Secretary General uh
were taking questions at the end so some
of the headlines here first from the
Jordanian foreign minister he said
Israel has violated every moral
principle um that Gaza is now an open
graveyard that Israel's government is
led by radical and racist ministers who
are dragging the region into chaos and
he called on the UN Security Council to
adopt the draft that is going to be put
before the the council uh later today if
only he said if only to a signal to the
world um that enough is enough so that's
on the part of the Jordanian foreign
minister now the un uh Secretary General
Antonio Gutierrez uh has says has said
that speaking with his teams in Gaza
they've never seen anything as bad as
Gaza and he was pointing out this is
coming from seasoned humanitarian uh
veterans uh he also said the scale and
the speed of the death and destruction
in Gaza is on an entirely different
level let's uh bring in Adel Abdul he's
a fellow and director for the foreign
policy and security program at the
Middle East Council on global Affairs
you were listening to the whole thing
with us what stood out to you well uh
I'm struck by the secretary General's
comments I have to say they're very
courageous uh open uh and critical of
Israel but in the same time he
highlighted uh in his comments the
limitations of the UN as an organization
and the inability of the UN Security
Council to find a binding resolution uh
against Israel so you find that him
really showing the highlighting the work
of un but in the same time highlighting
its limitations oh so that's really
interesting that's that's what he ended
with and that's also what stood out to
me he was asked a question about how um
International condemnation of Israel's
war can actually be implemented into
facts and into a ceasefire and he gave
this rather long answer but I think we
should get into it because it's
interesting he said look the UN is a
complex place it's a vast place and
though if I par paraphrase he was is
essentially saying the one thing that's
not working the one thing where we're
stuck is the security Council but
everything else there is Clarity whether
it's the general assembly which has
passed a a resolution back in uh it was
a few months ago now passed a resolution
calling for a ceasefire whether it's the
general assembly whether it's the
Secretary General himself whether it's
the people the UN staff working on the
ground many of whom have been killed he
says all of that's working the one thing
that's not working where we're not
finding consensus consensus on Major
World issues including Israel is the
security Council that's correct and this
is a reflection of course of the
geopolitical issues uh ramifications of
the Russia uh Ukraine war the
fragmentation of Global Order Rising us
China uh competition by which the UN SEC
secretary un Security Council now is an
arena of all of these issues so it
becomes less about uh Gaza and Palestine
and more about the geopolitical context
but actually if you look at the
resolution from uh last week and you
look at the resolution that they are
voting on today if the US actually joins
in unanimously voting for this actual
ceasefire uh then this will actually
become further pressure on Israel to act
but I don't see that happening yeah you
told us earlier they won't I don't think
so because uh since the UN was
established uh the US has voted vetoed
more than 40 resolutions that have
condemned Israel actually 46 and what we
see today is probably the 47th of them
as the US provides the the Fig Leaf uh
for Israel to cover its crimes and if
this fig Leaf is removed then really
Israel will be exposed for the genocide
of is actually uh doing for the
Palestinian people this is an
interesting and useful reminder you're
saying this would be if the UN um gives
diplomatic cover to Israel this evening
later today at the security Council it
would be the 47th veto that they have
used you said since the creation of the
UN that means in more than that means in
75 years almost that's correct and this
included the invasion of Southern
Lebanon uh the occupation of the Golan
Heights and all other resolutions
according to national law where Israel
has broken International but I mean this
really is the question what is
international law what is this
International liberal order that us
perceives to uphold there's a big double
standard here when it comes to Russia
and Ukraine International communities
mobilized quickly there are atrocities
perpet perpetrated and condemned by the
International Community that Russia has
has done in Ukraine but when we focus
the shift on Israel Israel has given a
bit of a c blanch but I would say that
this is really changing put aside the US
for now and let's focus on other
countries like for example in Europe we
have the Spaniards uh the belgians uh
and other European countries who are
saying now we are ready to recognize a
Palestinian State we look at the
solidarity the South South solidarity
with South Africa Brazil and other
countries in the global South
highlighting the solidarity with
Palestine it really shows how the
international uh Community has really
moved uh for the Palestinian uh issue to
be resolved once and for all the the
Secretary General Antonio Gutierrez
seemed to be um alluding to what you're
saying at the end of his his last remark
his his last answer he seemed to be
suggesting the answer may not be coming
from the security Council the answer may
be coming from this pervasive feeling
among the International Community he
said including um friends of Israel this
emerging consensus as he put it that the
war must stop that the operation in Rafa
would be catastrophic and that nothing
can justify the collective punishment of
Palestinian people he seemed to be
saying these values they exist they are
widely shared not acted upon by the
security Council but he sees something
Rising as I listen to him yeah exactly
and if you look at historical parallels
you know with apartheid South Africa
what really uh put pressure on a partide
regime in South Africa is this
International condemnation and isolation
of the South African uh regime and a
sanctions uh and a boycott movement
globally you know so I think this is
really what's going to put pressure on
the Israelis International isolation a
concerted campaign uh at uh sanctions
potential sanctions and trade impacting
trade and weapons transfers to Israel
and finally the need for unified
Palestinian movement if you remember of
course the Palestinians are divided
amongst themselves so the big hus comes
to them as well to have a unified
movement that can Advocate collectively
for their demands one last thing um the
Jordanian foreign minister was asked you
know how how this can be brought to an
end this war the the humanitarian
catastrophe in uh in Gaza he was very
honest he said look let's be honest
Jordan can't stop this war this speaks
to something that we've heard so many
times viewers that what what can be done
and what can be done specifically in the
region and by Arab countries and his
answer by the Jordanian foreign mys we
can't end this unfortunately he's
speaking truth because the D the
Dynamics in the region highlight that
also a number of states have uh peace
treaties and long-term interest with
with Israel while they can collectively
uh work together at the Arab League
level or the GCC level or at the
international level with the UN there
are limitations of of this approach and
it really comes down to how much
pressure that the US can exert directly
on Israel in terms of stopping weapons
supplies stopping funding and removing
the Fig Leaf we discussed earlier yeah
Adel ABD thank you very much for
following that live with us in the
studio thank you